<1>A geologist is kneeling on a rocky, reddish-brown outcrop in a dry, sunny environment. The geologist, wearing a hat, a blue long-sleeved shirt, and light-colored pants, is examining the rock layers with a tool, possibly a geological hammer or a hand lens. The landscape features sparse, dry vegetation, including small bushes and a couple of small trees. In the background, there is a low, reddish-brown hill under a clear blue sky. The rocks in the foreground are layered and fractured.<2>A group of geologists stands on a rocky outcrop. In the foreground, there's a striking formation of vertically oriented, sharp, reddish-brown rock shards, resembling a shattered log or a petrified tree stump. A geological hammer is resting on top of this formation. In the background, two men in outdoor gear are standing on the same outcrop, observing the landscape. The setting appears to be a rugged, arid, or semi-arid region.The Place of Structural Geology in SciencesScience is the search for knowledge about the Universe, its origin, its evolution, and how it works. Geology, one of the core science disciplines with physics, chemistry, and biology, is the search for knowledge about the Earth, how it formed, evolved, and how it works. Geology is often presented in the broader context of Geosciences; a grouping of disciplines specifically looking for knowledge about the interaction between Earth processes, environments and societies.Structural Geology, Tectonics and Geodynamics form a coherent and interdependent ensemble of sub-disciplines, the aim of which is the search for knowledge about how minerals, rocks and rock formations, and Earth systems (i.e., crust, lithosphere, asthenosphere ...) deform and through which processes.1<3>Image 1: A close-up view of folded rock layers, primarily in shades of purple, red, and dark grey. The layers are bent into a series of sharp folds, known as chevrons or kink bands. Two small white circular objects, possibly coins for scale, are placed on the rock face. The text "Structural geology" is written at the bottom.Image 2: A computer model showing a cross-section of the Earth's lithosphere. A blue-colored oceanic lithosphere is shown subducting (bending downwards) beneath a green and pink continental lithosphere. Red and white areas represent the mantle, with a "melt" zone indicated in pink at the top of the subducting slab. The text labels are "cont. lithosphere", "melt", and "oceanic lithosphere". The source "Rey et al., 2014" and the term "Geodynamics" are at the bottom.Image 3: A 3D block diagram illustrating a tectonic setting. It shows a complex arrangement of rock layers being faulted and folded. Arrows indicate the direction of movement and forces. A key feature is labeled "Median high-strain zone". The term "Tectonics" is written next to the diagram.Structural Geology aims to characterise deformation structures (geometry), to characterize flow paths followed by particles during deformation (kinematics), and to infer the direction and magnitude of the forces involved in driving deformation (dynamics). As a field-based discipline, structural geology operates at scales ranging from 100 microns to 100 meters (i.e. grain to outcrop).Tectonics aims at unraveling the geological context in which deformation occurs. It involves the integration of structural geology data in maps, cross-sections and 3D block diagrams, as well as data from other Geoscience disciplines including sedimentology, petrology, geochronology, geochemistry and geophysics. Tectonics operates at scales ranging from 100 m to 1000 km, and focus on processes such as continental rifting and basin formation, subduction, collisional processes and mountain building processes etc.Geodynamics focus on the forces that drive mantle convection, plate motion and deformation of Earth's material. Geodynamics is concerned with deep mantle processes such as mantle convection, cold drips, hot plumes and their links to plate motion, including dynamic plate subsidence and uplift, and plate tectonic processes. Geodynamics involves working at scales > 100 km. Numerical modeling is at the core of modern geodynamics.2<4>Image 1: A wide shot of a hillside with exposed reddish and brown tilted rock layers. The layers are dipping downwards to the right (south, as inferred from the text). The hillside is covered with green bushes and some dry grass.Image 2: A close-up of a metamorphic rock, an orthogneiss. The rock has a foliated texture with elongated, whitish K-feldspar crystals "tiled" within a darker matrix. This tiling indicates a sense of shear. A one-euro coin is placed on the rock for scale. An arrow with the text "<<<--- Stretching lineation --- >>>" points horizontally across the image, indicating the orientation of the lineation.Like all scientists, structural geologists follow research strategies that call upon concepts such as: fact, hypothesis, model, theory, and law. A good understanding of these terms is essential for all scientists.A fact is a bit of truth. For a structural geologist a "fact" could be the dip direction of a bedding plane. Having measured that north is to the left on the top image, then it is a fact that the dip direction of the bedding is to the south.An hypothesis is an assumed fact. It is a short statement one makes to go further into a reasoning. For instance, assuming that the bottom photo is parallel to the stretching lineation (hypothesis), then one can infer that the sense of shear deduced from the "tiling" of K-feldspars in this orthogneiss is top to the right.A model is a self-consistent framework providing a coherent explanation for the observed facts. A model combines as many facts as possible and as little hypotheses as possible. A good model enables predictions to be made. A model is proven wrong if key predictions are not verified. It can be iteratively strengthened via minor modifications to account for both the facts and the predictions.A theory is a very robust model which accounts for a large number of independent facts; and whose numerous predictions have been verified over a long period of time. Evolution and Plate Tectonics are two scientific theories, Creationism is not.A law is a simple, fundamental concept that is always verified by experiments and that underpins our understanding of the world. For instance, the law of gravity and the laws of thermodynamics underpin our understanding of physics and chemistry.Truth is not a scientific concept.3<5>Image 1: A portrait of Francis Bacon, a man with a beard and mustache, wearing a dark hat and a white ruffled collar.Image 2: A portrait of Charles Darwin, an elderly man with a prominent white beard and white hair, looking directly at the viewer.Image 3: A black spiral-bound notebook resting on an outcrop of layered and folded rock. The rock has a brownish, weathered appearance with some lighter-colored veins.Image 4: A portrait of Albert Einstein, an elderly man with his characteristic wild, white hair and mustache.The Baconian method: This method, sometimes called the "induction approach", is based on the collection of facts without regard to a particular model. Eventually, the growing dataset self organizes into a model; this is the "zero hypothesis" approach. Isaac Newton, a fervent adept of Francis Bacon's induction approach, once said: "I don't make hypotheses". This method is at the core of modern data mining.The Darwinian method: A model is built from of a set of facts. The model is used to make verifiable predictions. The predictions are verified by the acquisition of new data or via experimentation, if necessary the model is modified to account for the new data or the new observation. This iterative process eventually leads to a robust model.There is no need to oppose the Baconian and the Darwinian methods. Both have earned their place in Science.The Reality...: Scientific progress is almost never the result of strictly rational scientific methods. Intuition, non-rational and non-logical thinking make science fun, exciting and surprising. Einstein once said: "The only real valuable thing is intuition."... and also that ... "Imagination is more important than knowledge."4<6>A roadside outcrop showing a light-colored, near-vertical basaltic dike cutting through reddish-brown, horizontally layered shales. The dike is a prominent, resistant feature standing out from the softer surrounding rock. Some green vegetation is growing on the slope above and around the outcrop. A small object, likely a field notebook, is placed for scale near the base of the dike.Structural Geology and Tectonics combine two aspects:1/ Description and analysis of 3D structures and microstructures (Structural Geology sensu stricto). Structural geologists are concerned with features resulting from deformation. These include fractures, faults, folds, boudins, shear zones, cleavages (also knows as schistosities), foliations, lineations and crystallographic fabrics (e.g. crystallographic preferred orientation).From the analysis of these structures, they aim to understand finite strain (i.e., the ultimate product of long, sometimes polyphased deformation histories), and incremental strain (i.e., the small increments of deformation, the accumulation of which leads to the finite strain).Structural geologists are interested in understanding "strain fields" by mapping deformation features such as foliations and stretching lineations that tell us the orientation of the principal shortening direction and principal lengthening direction respectively.In the case of faults and shear zones, they are interested in understanding their kinematics (i.e., the relative sense of motion of the blocks on either side of faults or shear zones) and the magnitude of the displacement involved.They are interested in inferring the direction of maximum and minimum stress directions from small deformation features such as centimeter-scale extensional fractures and associated stylolitic joints.Gallery 1.1 What do structural geologists look at?Basaltic dike intrusive in shales, (South France). A dike is an extensional fracture that was filled with lava at the time of opening. The direction of open-up is parallel to the direction of minimum stress (Photo credit: P. Rey).1 of 115<7>Image 1: A satellite image overlaid with a geological map. The map outlines a large, complexly folded geological structure. The underlying satellite image shows arid, rocky terrain. The map includes structural symbols (strike and dip) indicating the orientation of the rock layers. The numbers (e.g., 45, 27, 15, 30) represent the dip angle of the layers. The entire structure is outlined with a bold black line.Image 2: The output of a computational tectonic model. It's a cross-section showing layers of different colors (blue, yellow, orange, red) that have been deformed into a dome-like structure, with black dots indicating particle paths. The caption reads "Computational tectonic model of a gneiss dome (Rey, Teyssier, Kruckenberg and Whitney, Geology, 2011)."The purpose of these models is to explain the deformation history that led to the observed 3D strain fields. Tectonic models incorporate a broad range of data from other disciplines. No matter how tectonicists design these models - following hours of pure rational thinking or via flashes of insight after a heavy night - tectonic models should always be:Physically valid: They must obey the laws of physics. It sounds trivial but this requires serious computational modelling.Testable: They must provide testable predictions (structural, sedimentological, petrological, geochemical, geophysical ...) that can be verified.Robust: They must explain a large number of unrelated facts.Lean: Hypotheses should be kept to a minimum compared to the number of facts models explain.Movie 1.1 A predictive model of a gneiss dome (Metamorphic core complex)The computer model predicts a double-dome structure for migmatite-cored gneiss dome. The Entia dome in central Australia has a double-dome internal structure.6<8>A 3D block diagram illustrating a fold. The diagram shows layers of rock (colored yellow, teal, pink, and grey) bent into an 'S' shape. Key structural elements are labeled: "Fold axis," "Intersection lineation," "Bedding," and "Cleavage." An arrow indicates "North." Two stick figures are drawn for scale. The bedding is the original layering, while cleavage is a new set of parallel planes that have formed during deformation. The intersection of bedding and cleavage creates the intersection lineation, which is parallel to the fold axis.Data acquisition: Field GeologyThe world of structural geology is by nature three dimensional (3D). To unravel 3D architecture, structural geologists process a lot of structural measurements.Gallery 1.2 Structural DataIn the field, structural geologists measure the strike-dip-dip direction of planar features (bedding, cleavage, fault, fold axial surface ...), and plunge plunge direction of linear features (fold axes, intersecting lineations...).They gather information about the orientation and, when possible, the magnitude of strain and stress, and they determine the relative sense of displacement across brittle faults and ductile shear zones.Based on cross-cutting relationships, they determine the sequence of geological and deformational events, and they characterise incremental strain and finite (i.e. accumulated) strain.On aerial photographs and satellite images, structures too large to be seen in the field become obvious (sometimes). Ultimately, 3D structures must be consistent across all scales.Caption: Planar surfaces are oriented in space by their strike (azimuth of a horizontal line on the planar surface), dip (angle from horizontal down to the plane) and dip direction (geographic direction toward which the plane is sloping). Folds are oriented by the strike-dip-dip direction of their axial plane, and the plunge and plunge direction of their axis (line running along their hinge).7<9>A false-color Landsat satellite image showing a large area of the Earth's surface. The colors represent different rock types and geological features. There are large, pale, rounded shapes, identified as granitic domes. Surrounding them are areas of blue and green, which are greenstone belts. Several straight, dark lines run across the image from SSW to NNE, identified as Proterozoic dikes. The landscape appears ancient and highly deformed.When the surface geology is buried underneath a regolith (in-situ blanket of weathered rocks) or vegetation cover, geophysical images such as gravity anomaly maps, radiometric maps, aeromagnetic maps etc can reveal a lot of information on the nature of the sub-surface geology and deeper structures.Remote sensing techniques (airborne and satellite) are expanding very fast. Multispectral (e.g., ASTER satellite) and hyperspectral imaging (airborne) allow geologists to have access to high-resolution images over a range of electromagnetic wavelengths covering visible (400-700 nanometer), infrared to near infrared (NIR: 700-1000 nanometer), shortwave infrared (SWIR: 1000-2500 nanometer) and far infrared (FIR: >2500 nanometer). These images allow for the mapping of the distribution of minerals at the Earth surface.(//portal.auscope.org/portal/gmap.html).Gallery 1.3 Structural data from geophysicsLandsat image of the east Pilbara (WA). The pale rounded features are granitic domes. In blue green are greenstone belts (continental flood basalts). The straight lines running SSW-NNE are Proterozoic dikes.8<10>A seismic reflection profile, which is a cross-sectional image of the subsurface. The image is composed of wavy black, red, and white lines, which represent different rock layers. A clear disruption in the layers is visible in the center, where the layers are bent downwards and offset. This disruption is identified as a normal fault. There are scales for horizontal distance ("1 km") and vertical two-way travel time ("500 ms TWT"). The logo "FUGRO" is in the bottom left corner.Seismic reflection is at the core of oil and gas exploration. Elastic waves, artificially induced at the Earth's surface via explosive or vibration trucks, propagate through rock formations reflecting and refracting at acoustic impedance contrasts (i.e. contrast in the product of velocity x density). The processing of waves traveling back to the surface can reveal in minute details the underground geology.Visit the Virtual Seismic Atlas: see-atlas.leeds.ac.uk:8080Gallery 1.4 Structural data from geophysicsVirtual Seismic Atlas Author: Rob Butler. Normal fault in the Inner Moray Firth using Fugro 2D data.9<11>A geological map of South Africa. Different colors represent different rock formations of various ages, from the Archaeozoic to the Phanerozoic. A detailed legend on the left lists the geological units by age and name. Major cities like Cape Town, Johannesburg, and Durban are marked, as well as neighboring countries like Namibia and Botswana. The map shows large-scale geological structures, such as the circular Bushveld Complex and the Cape Fold Belt.Structural data are summarized in various documents:1/ Geological maps and cross sections show the distribution of rock formations and structures (e.g., faults and folds) at the Earth's surface. A geological map is a very powerful document, as one can reconstruct the 3D sub-surface geology.Gallery 1.5 Synthesis of structural data2/ Tectonic maps and structural profiles show the distribution of deformation-related structures such as faults and shear zones, foliations and lineations, distribution of fold axes, strain magnitude etc.3/ Structural sketch-maps are simplified geological maps in which rock formations are grouped in packages separated by unconformities, each group sharing the same tectonic history.4/ Block diagrams, tectonograms: Illustrative 3D representation of structures.Caption: Geological map of South Africa.1 of 1110<12>Two diagrams illustrating the concept of a balanced cross-section.The top diagram (a) shows a geological cross-section of a fault-propagation fold. Layers of rock (numbered 1-7) are bent and broken by a series of faults (labeled a-h). The section is labeled NNE on the left and SSW on the right.The bottom diagram (b) shows the "restored" or "unfolded" version of the top cross-section. The faults have been removed and the layers have been flattened out to their presumed original horizontal state. This restoration checks if the initial interpretation of the fold and fault geometry is geometrically plausible. Both diagrams have a scale bar of 2m.Geological maps and cross-sections are models. They combine data (measurements and observations made directly in the field, and from drill cores) and hypotheses. Indeed, in places where no rock is exposed geologists must hypothesize to fill-in observation gaps.To validate maps and cross-sections geologists use the concept of surface conservation. This concept is based on the premise that a rock layer maintains its surface area during deformation. This premise holds true as long as rock formations deform with little in-bed mass transfer (via dissolution for instance). A cross-section is said to be balanced (i.e. geometrically consistent) when, upon restoration (i.e. retro-deformation), lithological interfaces recover their original horizontal position, and when there is no overlap or gap.A 4D tectonic model (3D plus time), often presented in the form of a time sequence of block diagrams, must also be thermally and mechanically consistent. Verifying both aspects requires computational modelling, which in addition to its capacity of validation presents the additional advantage to be predictive.Gallery 1.6 Model ValidationExample of cross-section restoration in a fault-propagation fold (Masini et al., Journal of Structural Geology, 2010).11<13>A close-up of a highly deformed metamorphic rock. The rock has a strong foliation (layering) that is intensely folded. A darker, more resistant rock layer forms a hook-shaped fold (a refolded fold) within a lighter grey, more pervasively foliated matrix. A small black object, possibly a lens cap, is placed on the rock for scale. The texture is complex, indicating multiple phases of deformation.Structural geology is at the core of hydrocarbon and mineral exploration, as structures control the migration, trapping and escape of hydrocarbon and mineralized fluids. Structural geology is the first stage of any regional geophysical and geochemical surveys aiming at identifying new mineralized provinces. It is also critical for the interpretation of geophysical, geochemical, and geochronological data. At the mine camp scale, structural geology guides the mining process.Structural geology is at the core of geotechnical site assessment before the building of bridges, dams, tunnels, nuclear reactors, waste disposals etc.Because of the obvious relationship between faults and earthquakes, structural geology is at the core of earthquake mitigation and earthquakes seismology.Structural geology is central to studies on past and present mountain belts and sedimentary basins. No geological, geochemical or geophysical study can be done without the input of structural geology.What makes a good structural geologist?The ability to think in 3D and to solve large-scale 4D puzzles.The ability to interact with a large range of geoscientists over a wide range of geological and environmental problems.The ability to link field studies to computational modelling.12<14>A screenshot of a multiple-choice question from an electronic textbook or quiz.The question is "Question 1 of 5. In Science, a Theory is:".There are four options:A. An hypothesis still to be tested.B. An assumption based on facts.C. A robust model.D. A proven hypothesis.Option C is selected with a green checkmark, indicating it is the correct answer.The objective of this eBook is to provide a robust and enjoyable initiation to Structural Geology.Its readers will develop a good understanding of structures and microstructures that result from the deformation of the Earth's lithosphere. Readers will gather enough insight and knowledge to learn independently from advanced Structural Geology textbooks.This eBook covers the basics about faults, folds, shear zones, boudins and their related fabrics. We will learn to use fractures and faults to conduct paleostress analysis, a fundamental constraint for hydrocarbon and mineral exploration, as well as risk assessment in seismically active regions. We will learn to use folds, shear zones and fabrics to perform strain analysis in order to understand strain regime and strain magnitude.Finally, this eBook will motivate its readers to go into the field and understand geology from a structural geology perspective.Review 1.1Question 1 of 5In Science, a Theory is:A. An hypothesis still to be tested.B. An assumption based on facts.C. A robust model.D. A proven hypothesis.(Correct Answer: C)13<15>Two Google Earth satellite images side-by-side, showing a landscape with large-scale folds.The left image shows a wide view of a large fold structure in an arid region. The layers of rock are clearly visible as light and dark bands. A black box outlines a smaller area, which is shown magnified in the right image. A scale bar indicates "20km".The right image is a zoomed-in view of the area in the black box, showing smaller, more detailed folds within the larger structure. The rock layers are bent into a series of parallel, wave-like forms. A scale bar indicates "2km".Fractures and faults are prominent in the upper part of the continental and oceanic lithosphere, where they are often associated with earthquake activity. The above Google Earth images show a fracture field in southern Pakistan (N25°35 / E62°10). Open Google Earth and check for yourself how many phases of faulting you can argue for.14<16>A schematic cross-section of the Earth's continental crust from the surface down to the Moho (the base of the crust). The diagram illustrates the concept of "structural levels," showing how the style of deformation changes with depth.Top Level: Shows "Faults" and "Upright, isopach folds." The layers are gently folded.Middle Level: Starts with the "Schistosity front." The folds become tighter and more inclined ("Inclined, similar folds" and "Overturned, tight folds").Lower Level: Shows highly deformed rocks with "Metamorphic nappes and recumbent folds" and "Tectonic transposition, recumbent isoclinal folds." The fabrics are mostly sub-horizontal.The different levels are depicted with increasingly complex and intense deformation structures.Gallery 2.1 Structures and structural level.The concept of Structural Level is based on the observation that the style of deformation changes with depth due to changes in temperature and pressure (the product between density, depth and gravitational acceleration). With depth, strain becomes more pervasive, synchronous with metamorphism, and often leads to sub-horizontal strain structures and tectonic fabrics such as foliations and lineations.The Upper Structural Level (~0-15 km) is the domain of brittle deformation (faults & fractures), upright isopach folds, extensional fractures and stylolitic joints. Bedding is always recognizable.The Intermediate Structural Level (~10-25 km) starts at the schistosity front, where schistosity (also known as cleavage) begins to form. The style of folding includes: similar folds, tight folds and overturned folds with a strong axial planar schistosity. Pressure solution is the dominant cleavage-forming mechanism. As water is released during prograde metamophism abundant quartz veins form, and Ductile deformation dominates over fracturing. Metamorphic grade does not exceed the greenschist to mid-amphibolite facies (~300 to ~600°C).In the Lower Structural Level (>~20 km) the style of deformation includes: metamorphic nappes, large scale recumbent folds and shallow dipping ductile shear zones. Deformation is intense and pervasive, tectonic transposition makes the mapping of early fabrics difficult if not impossible, fabrics are sub-horizontal. Metamorphic grades ranges from amphibolite facies to granulite facies (>600°C), and partial melting is often present.15<17>A photograph of Devils Tower in Wyoming. It is a massive, steep-sided igneous intrusion with prominent vertical cracks, known as columnar jointing. The columns are polygonal in cross-section. The tower rises dramatically from a forested, boulder-strewn base against a clear blue sky.Joints: A joint is a planar discontinuity with no relative displacement of the adjacent blocks. Joints develop during the exhumation of rocks following erosion of the overburden. Joints result from contraction and expansion due to cooling and decompression respectively.Stylolites and stylolitic joints: Stylolitic joints are discontinuities that result from a deformation mechanism called "pressure-solution". They form through stress-induced dissolution along an irregular surface. Dissolution is triggered by stress concentration at the contact between grains. This process puts into solution molecules detached from minerals and clastic grains.Stylolitic joints are often darker than their host rocks as iron-coated insoluble particles accumulate in the joint. In section, stylolitic joints are made of tooth-like cones. The cone axes can be either perpendicular to the joint or at an angle, but they always point in the direction of the maximum stress at the time of their formation.Gallery 2.2 Joints and StylolitesColumnar jointing in a felsic volcanic. Devil Tower, Wyoming (Ph. Credit: Rosyew)16<18>Four block diagrams illustrating the different modes of fractures.Mode I (Extensional fracture): Two blocks are pulled apart, opening up a crack perpendicular to the direction of pulling.anti-Mode I (Stylolitic joint): Two blocks are pushed together, causing dissolution along a jagged, tooth-like surface.Mode II (Shear fracture: sliding): Two blocks slide past each other in a direction perpendicular to the fracture edge (like sliding a deck of cards).Mode III (Shear fracture: tearing): Two blocks slide past each other in a direction parallel to the fracture edge (like tearing a piece of paper).Fractures are discontinuities with limited displacement. They form when applied stress reaches the yielding threshold, i.e. the stress at which rock fractures. There are two types of fractures classified into 3 modes:Extensional Fractures form when the adjacent blocks move away from each other in a direction sub-perpendicular to the fracture plane. The direction of opening of the fracture is parallel to that of the least resistance (i.e. the least stress). Often, extensional fractures define "en échelon" array or even "conjugated en échelon array". Extensional fractures are also known as "tension gashes". Very often these fractures are cemented with minerals that precipitate from the solution filling the rock's pore space. Quartz in silica-rich rocks and calcite in carbonate-rich rocks commonly seal the fractures.Extensional fractures and stylolitic joints are often associated and form Mode 1 and anti-Mode 1 fracturing. Together they reveal the orientation of the three principal stress axes. This micro-structure association forms the basis of paleostress analysis, which consists of mapping stress trajectories.Gallery 2.3 Extensional FracturesFractures are classified into 3 main modes.17<19>Image 1: A close-up of a reddish-brown, finely layered rock (shale). The layers are offset by a series of small, parallel, diagonal cracks, which are labeled "Shear fractures". These fractures show a small amount of displacement, indicating shearing.Image 2: A photomicrograph (a photo taken through a microscope) of a rock with a similar structure. Dark and light layers are cut and offset by a set of parallel micro-scale shear fractures. The texture is very fine.Gallery 2.4 Shear FracturesTop image: Conjugated shear fractures. Note the offsets of the layering parallel to the shear planes.Bottom image: Micro-scale shear fracture in a finely laminated shale (length of the photo is about 4 cm, Photo credit: P. Rey).18<20>A 3D block diagram illustrating the three main types of tectonic regimes and the faults they produce.Extensional Regime (left): Indicated by red arrows pointing away from each other. This creates a "Graben" structure, where a central block (green) drops down between two stationary blocks (yellow). This is a type of normal faulting.Contractional Regime (center, not explicitly shown but implied): Produces reverse faults.Transcurrent/Strike-Slip Regime (right): Indicated by red arrows pointing in opposite horizontal directions. This causes blocks to slide past each other horizontally.Faults: A fault is a fracture across which two blocks have slipped; the displacement of adjacent blocks is parallel to the fault plane. Faulting corresponds to the brittle failure of an undeformed rock formation or, alternatively, involves frictional sliding on a pre-existing fault plane. Faulting occurs when the maximum differential stress (i.e., maximum stress σ1​ minus minimum stress σ3​) exceeds the shear strength of an intact rock formation, or the frictional strength of a pre-existing fault.Fault types: There are three types of faults.Normal faults: the hanging wall moves down dip relative to the footwall. Normal faults dominates in the extensional tectonic regime (the maximum stress σ1​ is vertical).Reverse faults: the hanging wall moves up dip relatively to the footwall. Reverse faults are common in the contractional tectonic regime (the minimum stress σ3​ is vertical).Strike-slip faults (dextral or sinistral): the blocks move horizontally past one another. Strike-slip faults often indicate a transcurrent tectonic regime (the intermediate stress σ2​ is vertical).Interactive 2.1 Faults and fault blocksThree tectonic regimes.19<21>A collection of block diagrams showing various types of faults and the orientation of the principal stresses (σ1​,σ2​,σ3​) that cause them.Normal Fault: σ1​ is vertical, causing the hanging wall to move down.Reverse Fault: σ3​ is vertical, σ1​ is horizontal, causing the hanging wall to move up.Sinistral (Left-Lateral) Strike-Slip Fault: σ2​ is vertical, blocks move horizontally to the left relative to each other.Dextral (Right-Lateral) Strike-Slip Fault: σ2​ is vertical, blocks move horizontally to the right relative to each other.Oblique-Slip Faults: Combination of dip-slip and strike-slip motion (e.g., "Normal sinistral").Rotational (Scissor) Fault: Displacement decreases to zero at one end of the fault.Listric Fault: A curved fault plane that is steep near the surface and flattens with depth.At the Earth's surface, one of the principal stress axes is always vertical because air is too weak to sustain a shear stress component. Hence, at the Earth's surface the stress regime is said to be Andersonian. It may come as a surprise that a fault with a slip direction oblique to the strike (for instance a normal sinistral fault) can form close to the surface. In fact, it can be shown (Bott, 1959) that for a given Andersonian state of stress (i.e. state of stress with one vertical principal stress axis) the orientation of the slip direction (i.e the striae) can have any orientation on a pre-existing fault plane, and this orientation is only a function of the relative magnitude of the 3 principal stress axes.20<22>A large 3D block diagram explaining the components of slip on a fault. The fault plane separates the "FOOTWALL" from the "HANGINGWALL". A red arrow represents the "Net slip" vector, showing the total direction and magnitude of movement. This vector can be broken down into components:On the fault plane: "Strike slip" (horizontal component) and "Dip slip" (component down the slope of the fault). "Rake" or "Pitch" is the angle of the net slip vector on the fault plane.In the horizontal plane: "Strike slip" and "Heave" (the horizontal component of dip-slip).In the vertical plane: "Vertical throw" and "Heave".The fault surface itself shows "SLICKENLINE - STRIAE", which are linear grooves that indicate the direction of movement.Another smaller diagram shows the "Kinematic plane," which is perpendicular to the fault plane and parallel to the slip direction. It contains the principal stress axes σ1​ and σ3​, with σ1​ being at an angle of about 30° to the fault plane for new faults.Structural geologists are interested in "fault kinematic". In other words they want to find out the relative sense of motion of blocks on either side of faults, as well as the orientation and amplitude of the slip. Fault slip is characterized by a vector called the net slip. Its direction is that of the slip and its length is the amplitude of the slip. On a fault plane the direction of the net slip is often given by striae (i.e. a friction mark). The net slip can be decomposed into either 1/ two orthogonal components on the fault plane (strike-slip and dip slip components); or 2/ two orthogonal components in the vertical plane that contains the net slip vector (horizontal heave and vertical throw), or 3/ three orthogonal components in the geographic system (strike slip, heave, and vertical throw).The "kinematic plane" is the plane which is perpendicular to the fault plane and parallel to the net slip vector (ie the striae). For newly formed faults the kinematic plane contains the principal stress axis σ1​ and σ3​ with σ1​ at 30° from the fault plane.Gallery 2.5 Slip vector and striaeThe net slip vector and its components.21<23>A diagram showing a fault plane (the grey surface, which is the footwall) and various small-scale structures (kinematic indicators) that can be used to determine the direction of movement. The hanging wall block (not shown) has moved down and to the right relative to this footwall block. The indicators include:Riedel shears (R and R'): Small synthetic and antithetic fractures.Tool mark: A gouge created by a hard object.Extensional fracture: A small crack opening up.Mineralized step: A step-like feature coated with new mineral growth.Rough surface (strylolith) and Smooth surface: Areas of pressure dissolution and polished slip, respectively.The orientations of the principal stress axes, σ1​ (compressional) and σ3​ (tensional), that would cause this motion are also shown.Kinematic analysis is the art of figuring out the relative sense of motion across faults and shear zones.To do this, structural geologists use "kinematic criteria" i.e. structures and microstructures that develop during faulting and whose geometric characteristics depend on the sense of shear.The main kinematic criteria for brittle faults are:1/ Riedel shear fractures (R and R'): R are synthetic at 10-15° to the fault plane; R' are antithetic (opposite sense of shear) and oriented at 70-80° to the fault plane.2/ Tool marks: Cavities formed by the mechanical erosion of the fault plane by hard objects.3/ Extensional fractures at ca. 30° angle to the fault plane (also called T fractures).4/ Mineralized steps: Step-shaped cavities filled with fibrous minerals (often quartz or calcite).5/ Dry steps: same as above but with no crystallization.6/ Rough surfaces (usually with styloliths) form due to pressure solution, and smooth surfaces (polished).Gallery 2.6 Kinematic analysisKinematic criteria shown on a cross-section perpendicular to a fault plane, the plane of the cross-section contains the striae (i.e. the plane of the cross-section is parallel to the kinematic plane). Only the footwall block is shown.22<24>A close-up of a fault breccia. The rock is composed of angular, dark grey fragments (clasts) that have been broken and shattered during fault movement. The spaces between these fragments are filled with a white mineral, likely quartz or calcite, which has cemented the breccia together.1/ Define the following terms: a fact, an hypothesis, a model, a theory and a law.2/ Define the Darwinian scientific method.3/ A scientific model should always verify a number of characteristics. What are they?4/ How do stylolitic joints form?5/ What are the two main types of fracture?6/ Draw a stylolite / extensional fracture association and give the orientation of the principal stress axes.7/ What are the three main types of faults?8/ Describe the three modes of fractures?9/ Define the following concepts: a/ A listric fault. b/ The kinematic plane.10/ Define the following concepts: Vertical and horizontal throw, the heave, the net slip?The picture below shows a cemented breccia, it is the result of faulting. The rock crumbled into numerous angular clasts. A silica-rich fluid circulated through the fault zone precipitating quartz that cemented the clasts together.23<25>A 3D block diagram created with a geology software ("Visible Geology"). It shows a block of sedimentary rock with numerous, multi-colored horizontal layers. On the top surface, two wider bands (blue and purple) are shown. The entire block is tilted gently, dipping towards the right (east). A scale from 0 to 50 is shown, and an arrow indicates North (pointing to the top left).24<26>A screenshot of a multiple-choice question.Question 1 of 7: The concept of "structural level" refers to:A. The level of structural complexity.B. The partitioning of strain style with depth.C. The boundary between brittle deformation and ductile deformation.D. The number of phases of deformation.Option B is selected with a green checkmark.(Correct Answer: B)25<27>Image 1: A 3D block diagram illustrating the concept of stress on a plane. An arrow labeled σ (sigma) represents the total stress vector acting on an inclined plane within the block. This vector is shown with an opposite, equal force acting from within the block, indicating a state of equilibrium.Image 2: A 2D diagram resolving the total stress vector (σ) into two components: Normal stress (σn), which is perpendicular to the plane, and Shear stress (τ), which is parallel to the plane.Stress: a couple of traction acting across a surface.We have seen in the former chapter that the orientation of newly formed and reactivated faults and fractures can be easily used to infer the orientation of the principal stress axes responsible for faulting. At this point we need to clarify the concepts of force, traction and stress. Forces, tractions, and stresses are the causes of deformation.26<28>A series of diagrams illustrating the concepts of force and traction.Top Left: A block labeled "continental crust" on top of "mantle". An arrow "F" indicates a surface force acting on the side of the crust.Top Middle: A similar block, but with an arrow "P" pointing downwards, representing a volume (body) force like gravity.Top Right: A block showing crustal thickening (a mountain root). Arrows "F" indicate internal body forces resulting from density variations.Bottom: A diagram showing a force "T" acting on a surface. This is defined as traction. The traction vector "T" is then resolved into a "Normal traction" component (perpendicular to the surface) and a "Shear traction" component (parallel to the surface).According to Newton's second law of motion, a force is a physical entity which tends to change either the state of rest or the uniform motion in a straight line of a body. A force is described by a vector, its SI unit is the Newton (N). Its magnitude is equal to the rate of change of momentum of the body. The force F producing the acceleration a (m.s⁻²) of a body of mass m (kg) is therefore given by: F = m.a. Hence, a force of 1 Newton accelerates a 1 kg object by 1 m per second per second.There are two types of forces:Surface forces act on the surface of a body. For instance the tectonic forces (e.g. ridge push and slab pull) acting on a lithospheric plate are surface forces, they are often called external forces.Volume forces (or body forces) act inside the body, they are often called internal forces. In a lithospheric plate, body forces arise due to gravity pulling every molecule toward the center of the Earth (P), and heterogeneities in density (e.g. lateral density changes due to crustal thickening).The concept of Traction: In mechanics, traction is a pressure vector that represents the limit of the ratio of force over area as area tends to zero. This force can have any orientation with respect to the surface. Traction is represented by a vector whose orientation is that of the force and its magnitude the ratio of the force (N) over the area (m²) of the surface. The unit of a traction is therefore that of pressure: N.m⁻². Tractions can be decomposed into a shear component (parallel to the surface) and normal component (normal to the surface).27<29>A series of diagrams illustrating the concept of the stress ellipsoid.Top Row (3 images): A small plane is shown at a point within a material. The stress vector (σ) acting on this plane changes its magnitude and orientation as the plane rotates.Bottom Image: An ellipsoid shape, called the stress ellipsoid. It represents the state of stress at a point. The three perpendicular axes of the ellipsoid are the principal stresses: σ1​ (maximum), σ2​ (intermediate), and σ3​ (minimum). By convention, σ1​≥σ2​≥σ3​.In a volume of rock, let's consider a physical point at rest, and let's consider a small surface centered on that point. The orientation of the small surface is characterized by its "normal" n (i.e. the vector orthogonal to the surface, the length of which is proportional to the surface area).The stress acting across this surface is defined by the couple of traction vector acting on opposite sides of the surface. In a strict sense, unbalanced tractions acting on a surface do not give rise to stress; they cause acceleration. Hence, the concept of stress applies to a body at equilibrium, in a state of rest or uniform rectilinear motion.Because the surface is at rest, these tractions have same magnitudes (i.e. length) but opposite directions. However, the magnitude and orientation of the stress change with the orientation of the small surface.If one could record the orientation and length of the stress as the surface rotates about its centre, one would see that the end tips of the stress define an ellipsoid. The stress ellipsoid is characterized by three principal orthogonal stresses (i.e. 3 pairs of equal but opposite tractions) σ1​, σ2​ and σ3​ with σ1​≥σ2​≥σ3​. There are only three positions of the surface for which the stress is perpendicular to it, and that σ1​, σ2​ and σ3​ are the normal stress vectors.The state of stress acting on a material point is characterized by an ellipsoid called the stress ellipsoid. It is defined by three perpendicular axes called the principal stresses: σ1​, σ2​ and σ3​. All stresses are positive (i.e. directed toward the material point). Extensional structures result from material moving or flowing in the direction of least stress.At the Earth's surface the state of stress is Andersonian, which means that one of the principal stress axes is vertical.28<30>Image 1 (top): A diagram showing that the "Total stress" ellipsoid (a prolate spheroid) can be decomposed into two components: a perfect sphere representing "Isotropic stress" and a dumbbell shape representing "Deviatoric stress". Total stress = Isotropic stress + Deviatoric stress.Image 2 (bottom): A mathematical representation of the stress decomposition. The "Stress tensor" (a 3x3 matrix) is shown to be the sum of the "Isotropic stress component" (a diagonal matrix with the mean stress, σi​, on the diagonal) and the "Deviator" (the deviatoric stress tensor). The formulas for the stress tensor components and the mean stress σi​=(σ1​+σ2​+σ3​)/3 are given.When the state of stress is anisotropic, the stress ellipsoid can be decomposed into an isotropic stress component of magnitude σi​=(σ1​+σ2​+σ3​)/3, and a deviatoric stress component that accounts for the difference between the total stress and the isotropic stress. The deviatoric stress component is responsible for deformation.Mathematically, the state of stress is a 2nd order tensor (9 components). This tensor is symmetric (σij​=σji​) and the sum of its diagonal components (Σσii​ = constant) is invariant (the value of each component changes as one changes the coordinate system, however Σσii​ is independent of the coordinate system). This tensor can be decomposed into an isotropic component and a deviator. It is always possible to choose a coordinate system so that the tensor is reduced to its principal stress components: i.e.: σij​=0, and σ11​=σ1​,σ22​=σ2​,σ33​=σ3​.29<31>A 3D block diagram showing a fault plane. On this plane, the total stress (σ) is resolved into two components: a normal stress (σn​), which is perpendicular to the fault plane, and a shear stress (τ), which is parallel to the fault plane and to the direction of slip (striae). The plane containing the stress vectors is the vertical plane in this diagram.Interactive 3.1 Stress is a couple of traction acting across a planeThe stress is decomposed into normal stress and shear stress...From experiments we observe that for a newly formed fault (i.e. developed from a fracture-less volume of rock):1/ σ1​, τ and σ3​ belong to the same plane. This plane is called the kinematic plane.2/ Shear stress and normal stress also belongs to the kinematic plane.3/ The slip vector on the fault plane is parallel to the shear stress.4/ The angle between the fault plane and σ1​ is close to 30°.When pre-existing faults exist, these faults may be reactivated when stressed. In the case of fault reactivation, one can observe from experiments that for a given fault orientation, and for a given state of stress defined by σ1​, σ2​ and σ3​:1/ The slip vector on the fault plane (i.e. direction parallel to the striae) is parallel to the shear stress.2/ The orientation of the shear stress depends on the orientation of τ, σ1​, σ2​ and σ3​ and R = (σ1​-σ2​)/(σ2​-σ3​).3/ It can be shown that for a state of stress stable in orientation, the striae can take any orientation on the fault plane depending on R (Bott, 1959).Therefore, one can infer from the processing of a large number of faults/striae/kinematic data, the orientation in space of the stress ellipsoid responsible for faulting, as well as the ratio R of the stress ellipsoid.30<32>Three diagrams illustrating the relationship between tectonic regimes, principal stress orientations, and the types of structures formed.COMPRESSION: σ3​ is vertical. This leads to reverse faults, vertical stylolitic joints (teeth pointing horizontally in the direction of σ1​), and horizontal extensional fractures.EXTENSION: σ1​ is vertical. This leads to normal faults, horizontal stylolitic joints, and vertical extensional fractures.TRANSCURRENT (STRIKE-SLIP): σ2​ is vertical. This leads to strike-slip faults, vertical stylolitic joints, and vertical extensional fractures. The horizontal orientations of σ1​ and σ3​ determine the type of strike-slip fault and the orientation of the vertical fractures.The determination in the field of the orientation in space of the paleostress ellipsoid responsible for the development of stylolites, fractures and faults is relatively easy. We have seen previously that there is a simple set of relationships between the orientation of the paleostress ellipsoid and the orientation of stylolitic joints, shear fractures and extensional fractures that develop in response to an applied stress.The sketch on the top right shows a set of microstructures that develop due to a tectonic regime in compression. From a stress point of view, a compressional tectonic regime is characterized by σ3​ being the vertical stress axis. From a strain point of view it is characterized by vertical stylolitic joints and horizontal extensional fractures. The stylolitic cones point in the direction of σ1​. The normal of extensional fractures is parallel to σ3​. The intermediate stress σ2​ is perpendicular to both σ1​ and σ3​.In an extensional tectonic regime σ1​ is vertical. Stylolitic joints are therefore horizontal, whereas extensional fractures are vertical. Note that horizontal stylolitic joints and vertical extensional fractures can also develop during the compaction of sediments during burial.In a transcurrent tectonic regime σ2​ is vertical. Therefore, both stylolitic joints and extensional fractures are vertical. The stylolitic cones point in the direction of σ1​, the normal to the extensional fracture being parallel to σ3​.31<33>Image 1 (top): A map view diagram showing stress perturbation around a single left-lateral (sinistral) strike-slip fault. The regional stress field has σ1​ (compression) oriented top-to-bottom and σ3​ (tension) oriented left-to-right. Near the fault, the stress trajectories (red lines for σ1​, blue dashed lines for σ3​) are bent. The diagram also shows the expected orientation of associated structures like Riedel shears (curved yellow blades) and stylolites (jagged black lines), which also rotate near the fault.Image 2 (bottom left and right): Two map view diagrams showing stress perturbations in the "step-over" regions between overlapping strike-slip faults.The left diagram shows a restraining bend (compressional step-over) between two left-lateral faults. In the overlap zone, extensional fractures (yellow rectangles) and stylolites form, indicating local compression and extension directions that are different from the regional stress field.The right diagram shows a releasing bend (extensional step-over) where the opposite occurs.Image 3 (bottom): A photograph of a rock surface showing a network of fractures. It appears to be a real-world example of the complex fracturing that can occur in stressed rocks.Stress is transmitted through rocks without perturbation as long as the material through which stress is transmitted is mechanically isotropic. This is rarely the case in nature. Hence, the stress field changes, in both magnitude and orientation, in the vicinity of mechanical heterogeneities such as faults.The sketch on the right illustrates that point. The progressive rotation of both extensional fractures and stylolitic joints show that σ1​ (red trajectories) and σ3​ (blue trajectories) rotate around σ2​ in the vicinity of the fault.Fault overlaps can be responsible for drastic stress perturbations in the region where faults overlap. The sketch below illustrates this point.32<34>A map showing the state of stress for the Australasian and Southeast Asian region. This is from the World Stress Map project. The continents are shown in yellow, with plate boundaries marked by red, green, and blue lines. Across the map, there are small symbols representing stress data points. The orientation of the symbols indicates the direction of maximum horizontal compressive stress (SHmax​). The color of the symbol indicates the tectonic regime (e.g., NF for normal faulting, SS for strike-slip, TF for thrust faulting). The map shows a complex pattern, with compression generally oriented north-south to northeast-southwest across Australia, and more varied patterns around the plate boundaries.Interesting place to visit: http://www.world-stress-map.org33<35>Three animated-style block diagrams illustrating the three main tectonic regimes, showing how blocks of rock would move.Left (Contractional): A central block is being pushed upwards and over another block, characteristic of a reverse or thrust fault.Middle (Transcurrent): Blocks are sliding horizontally past each other, characteristic of a strike-slip fault.Right (Extensional): A central block is dropping down relative to the blocks on either side, characteristic of a normal fault.Each diagram has arrows indicating the direction of principal stresses.Contractional Tectonic RegimeTranscurrent Tectonic RegimeExtensional Tectonic Regime34<36>A photomicrograph (photo taken through a microscope, likely with polarized light) of a deformed rock. A single, thin, white and blue mineral layer (a vein) has been tightly and complexly folded into a series of 'S' and 'Z' shapes. This folded layer is embedded in a green, foliated matrix. The style of folding is ptygmatic, which occurs when a competent layer is folded within a much less competent matrix.At depth, fracturing and faulting are inhibited by increasing confining pressure as well as increasing temperature which give rocks the ability to flow rather than break. At depth, rock formations organized into layered systems of alternating stronger and less strong layers, buckle under the action of deviatoric stress to form folds and fold systems, or alternatively stretch to form boudins.35<37>A hand specimen of a folded rock. The rock is dark grey to reddish-brown and shows a distinct antiform (an arch-like) fold. The layering within the rock is visible, particularly on the weathered, rougher underside. A coin is placed in front of the rock for scale.Folds form when shortening affects a layered rock formation involving alternating competent and less competent layers. Upon folding, rock formations are bended and buckled into a series of antiform and synform folds. A hinge zone is a region where the dip of the folded surface changes over a small distance. Such a region is also called a fold closure. In contrast, the dip is rather constant along fold limbs. The terms anticlinal and synclinal apply when an upward younging arrangement of the rock formations has been verified.The attitude of folds (their orientation in space) is characterized by the attitude of both their axial surface and their B axis also called the fold axis. The B axis corresponds to the fold hinge line, the line that links points of maximum curvature on a folded surface. The axial surface is defined as the surface containing all the hinge lines on successive surfaces folded about the same fold. The axial surface can be planar or not, and fold axis can be curved.Diagram showing a fold with labeled parts: HINGE, LIMB, ANTIFORM, SYNFORM, FOLD B AXIS, AXIAL SURFACE, FOLD A AXIS, FOLD C AXIS.36<38>Three diagrams illustrating how stereonets are used to analyze fold geometry.π (pi) diagram: A stereonet plot where the poles to bedding planes from around a fold are plotted. For a cylindrical fold, these poles lie on a great circle called the π-circle. The pole to this π-circle is the fold's B axis.β (beta) diagram: A stereonet plot where the great circles representing the bedding planes themselves are plotted. The intersection point of these great circles (the β-axis) is the fold's B axis.Axial Surface Determination: A diagram showing how the axial surface can be constructed on a stereonet. It is the plane that contains the fold's B axis and its axial trace (the line the fold makes on the ground surface).Geologists have designed various methods to characterise the geometry of folds from field data, in particular when the size of folds is beyond what can be practically measured directly in the field, typically when fold hinges extend over several hundred meters.One of these methods involves the use of the stereonet. Before folding, rock formations are sub-horizontal and the poles to beddings are everywhere vertical, hence plotting at the center of the stereonet. However after folding, the poles to the folded surface are no longer vertical but become distributed along a great circle (called the π circle), the pole of which corresponds to the fold B axis. This is know as the π diagram. Alternatively the fold B axis can be inferred from the intersection, on a stereonet, of great circles representing the stereographic projection of bedding surfaces randomly distributed about the fold. This is know as the β diagram.π and β diagrams alone cannot constrain the attitude of the axial surface. This can be achieved by plotting on a stereogram the axial trace of the fold as well as its axis. The axial trace of a fold is the line that links, on the ground surface, points of maximum curvature on successive folded surfaces. By definition the axial trace, since it is defined by points of maximum curvature, lies within the axial surface. Since a planar surface is fully defined by two lines within it (cf. Euclidean geometry), the axial surface can be deduced from the axial trace and the fold hinge.37<39>Image 1 (top): A satellite view of folded rocks in the Kimberley region of Western Australia. The rock layers are visible as bands of different colors and textures. A series of yellow dots has been placed along the hinge of a synform, marking its axial trace.Image 2 (middle): Diagrams illustrating how different fold shapes appear on a π-diagram (stereonet).Concentric fold: Poles to bedding are evenly distributed along the π-circle.Isoclinal folds: Poles cluster in two distinct points, representing the two parallel limbs.Asymmetric fold: One cluster of poles is much stronger than the other, representing the long limb and short limb.A π-diagram is shown with data points (poles) forming a great circle, indicating a cylindrical fold.Image 3 (bottom): A photograph of a large, upright, chevron-style fold in layered rocks. Above the fold, there is an unconformity, where younger, flat-lying red beds rest on top of the eroded, folded layers.Top Caption: Satellite view of folded Proterozoic rock formations from the Kimberley (WA). The doted line shows the fold axial trace.Bottom Caption: Upright fold in Carboniferous rocks with Permian unconformity (Portugal, Photo O. Matte).38<40>A series of diagrams classifying folds based on their geometry.Thickness: "Isopach" folds maintain constant layer thickness perpendicular to the layer (t). "Similar" folds maintain constant thickness parallel to the axial surface (e).Interlimb Angle: Folds are classified as "Open," "Tight," or "Isoclinal" as the angle between their limbs decreases.Axial Surface Dip: Folds are classified as "Upright" (vertical axial surface), "Inclined," "Overturned" (one limb is upside down), or "Recumbent" (horizontal axial surface).Photo: A photograph shows a large recumbent fold in layered gneissic rocks in a mountain setting.There are many ways to classify folds based on: i/ the thickness of folded layers, ii/ the angle between limbs, iii/ the dip of the axial surface, iv / the plunge of the fold axis, v/ the general shape of folds ... The following introduces a number of terms commonly used to describe folds.Isopach folds are folds in which the thickness t of each layer keeps constant. In similar folds it is the apparent thickness e measured parallel to the axial surface that remains constant.Open, tight and isoclinal, are terms referring to the angle between two successive fold limbs.Upright folds have a vertical axial surface. They may or may not be symmetric. Overturned folds have one limb with the younging direction pointing downward, whereas recumbent fold have sub-horizontal axial surfaces.Photo Caption: Recumbent folds in gneiss beneath the Indus Suture (Photo Credit: Gerold Zeillinger, diogenes.ethz.ch)39<41>Image series 1 (top row): Three diagrams illustrating fold classification based on the plunge of the fold axis. A single folded layer is shown.Horizontal fold: The hinge line is horizontal.Plunging fold: The hinge line is inclined.Reclined fold: The hinge line is inclined, and the fold "lies on its side" on the axial plane.Image series 2 (bottom row): Five diagrams illustrating different fold shapes.Concentric fold: Circular or arcuate fold shape.Kink fold (or Chevron fold): Straight limbs and very sharp, angular hinges.Ptygmatic fold: Highly irregular, "intestine-like" folds, typically of a stiff layer in a soft matrix.Box fold: Folds with a flat top and three limbs.Rootless fold: Folds where the limbs have been sheared off and are no longer connected.Image 3 (right): A photograph of a rock outcrop showing tight, angular chevron folds in a foliated metamorphic rock (paragneiss). A pen is included for scale.Folds can have all sorts of complex shapes and consequently all sorts of weird names.Concentric folds have a center of symmetry.Chevron folds (also called kink folds) have narrow hinges relative to the length of their limbs.Ptymatic folds have short limbs relative to the their hinges.Box folds somehow have three limbs and two hinges.Rootless folds have broken limbs due to shearing.Gallery 4.1 FoldsPhoto Caption: Chevron folds in a paragneiss (Olary block, SA, Photo P. Rey).40<42>Image 1 (main diagram): A detailed diagram illustrating various microstructures associated with folding. A series of folds are shown in a layered rock.So: Bedding plane is the original layering (yellow layer).S1: Axial plane cleavage is a new fabric that forms parallel to the axial surfaces of the folds.Slaty cleavage: A pervasive S1 cleavage where mineral grains have realigned.Fracture cleavage: In more competent layers, S1 can be a set of parallel fractures.Crenulation cleavage: A cleavage formed by the micro-folding of a pre-existing foliation.Parasitic fold: Smaller folds on the limbs of a larger fold.Image 2 & 3 (photomicrographs): Two microscope images showing crenulation cleavage in a low-grade schist. An earlier foliation is folded into tiny, regular micro-folds, defining the crenulation cleavage.During folding, the bending of bedding surfaces (So) is accommodated by the deformation of rocks at the grain scale. This deformation may produce the rotation and alignment of mineral grains and biogenic clasts parallel to the fold axial surface. This produces a secondary anisotropy plane (i.e. a planar fabric) called a cleavage plane (S1).Deformation can also change the shape of grains through a mechanism called pressure-solution. According to this mechanism of deformation, the part of the grain enjoying the larger stress is dissolved and the material removed migrates towards areas of lower stress. Through pressure-solution, a grain of spherical shape is transformed into an ellipsoid whose flattening plane (defined by its long and intermediate axes) tends to be parallel to the fold axial surface, hence participating in the development of a cleavage plane.Two other mechanisms contribute to the development of axial planar cleavage. Fracture cleavage involves the development of shear fractures in competent (hard) layers. These shear fractures tend to be parallel to the fold axial surface. Finally, crenulation cleavage develops because of the preferential alignment of limbs in micro-folds.Photo caption: Crenulation in a low-grade schist, the photo is ca. 2cm across. On the right small detail of the above photo (Photo P. Rey).41<43>Image 1 (top): A photograph of an outcrop showing bedding/cleavage relationships. The rock has fine layering (bedding) that is nearly horizontal. A steeply dipping cleavage cuts across the bedding. This relationship is indicative of the rock's position on a fold limb. A compass/clinometer is on top for scale.Image 2 (middle): Diagrams illustrating different types of lineations associated with folds.Intersection lineation: The line formed by the intersection of two planar fabrics, such as bedding (So) and cleavage (S1).Fold rodding or crenulation lineation: The line formed by the hinges of small micro-folds (crenulations).Both types of lineation are parallel to the main fold axis.Image 3 (bottom): A photograph of a rock surface showing a prominent crenulation lineation. The surface has a corrugated appearance due to the alignment of tiny fold hinges. A hammer is shown for scale.Fold rodding lineations, also called crenulation lineations, correspond to the hinge of micro-folds along bedding planes. Cleavage-bedding intersections are called intersection lineations. These lineations appear on cleavage and bedding surfaces.Both types of lineation run parallel to the fold axis, and therefore can be used as a proxy for fold hinges (i.e., the plunge and plunge direction of these lineations is the same as that of the fold axis).Top photo caption: Bedding and cleavage fabrics in a low grade schist (Photo credit: J.-P. Burg, diogenes.ethz.ch)Bottom photo caption: Crenulation lineation in a low grade schist (Photo credit: J.-P. Burg, diogenes.ethz.ch)42<44>A series of cartoon diagrams explaining how to use cleavage-bedding relationships to locate larger folds.Top Diagram: A geologist stands at an outcrop where both bedding (So) and cleavage (S1) are dipping to the west, but cleavage is steeper. The question is, where are the nearby anticline and syncline hinges?Bottom Diagrams (A1, B1, A2, B2): These show two possible interpretations. In one scenario (A), the geologist is on the limb of a large syncline to the east. In the other scenario (B), the geologist is on the limb of a large anticline to the west. The key is to observe how the cleavage "fans" around the fold hinge.One problem that geologists face is figuring out, in poor outcropping areas, the succession of anticlinal and synclinal closures adjacent to a given outcrop. The geologist below tries to figure out the position of the next anticline and syncline closures with respect to the outcrop. The outcrop consists of four beds dipping to the west. There is a cleavage plane (S1​) also dipping to the west, but much steeper that the bedding (S0​).The sketches A1 and B1 shows two possible solutions: either the adjacent anticlinal closure is to the left (A1), or it is to the right (B1) of the outcrop. In the next outcrop to the right (sketches A2 and B2), the geologist observes that the succession of rock formation is in the reverse order suggesting that a fold closure has been passed. To find out which of A2 or B2 fold systems is correct, we must remember that cleavages diverge away towards fold closures. From the angular relationships between S0​ and S1​ there can be only one valid solution which is given on the next page...43<45>Image 1 (top): The continuation of the cartoon from the previous page. The two possible fold geometries (B2 and A2) are shown. The correct solution is B2, where the cleavage is shown fanning upwards and outwards from the core of the anticline. In A2, the cleavage converges downwards into the syncline, which is geometrically incorrect for this type of fold.Image 2 (bottom): A photograph of a real fold in low-grade schists. The fold is an anticline. A strong axial planar cleavage cuts vertically through the fold, parallel to the axial plane. It does not show a fanning geometry, which suggests little strength contrast between the folded layers. A white coin is at the bottom for scale.In conclusion, cleavage-bedding relationships help structural geologists 1/ to infer the position of a given outcrop in a fold system, 2/ to infer the succession of adjacent fold closures with respect to an outcrop.Photo caption: Cleavage may not always develop with a fan distribution. Here an axial planar cleavage parallel to the fold axial plane in low grade schist. This suggests that there is little strength contrast between beds (Photo credit: P. Rey). NB: Stratigraphic layering is shown by change in color, texture and/or weathering.44<46>Image 1 (top diagram): A schematic cross-section of a large-scale fold system. The asymmetry of smaller "parasitic" folds on the limbs of the larger folds is used as a "vergence" indicator.On the left limb of the main anticline, the parasitic folds have a "Z" shape.On the right limb, they have an "S" shape.At the hinge of the main fold, they have a symmetric "M" shape.This pattern helps to determine the location of the major fold hinges. Arrows also show younging direction and shear sense.Image 2 (bottom photographs): Two examples of younging criteria in sedimentary rocks.Left: Loading cast structures, where denser sediment has sunk into a softer layer below, creating flame-like shapes that point upwards, indicating the younging direction. A pen is shown for scale.Right: Cross-bedding in a reddish sandstone. The curved cross-beds are truncated at the top and become tangential at the bottom, indicating that the layers get younger towards the left. A pencil is shown for scale.The facing of a fold system refers to the geographic direction of younging (shown with an arrow) of the long limbs of its parasitic folds. In a fold system, such as the one presented below, the facing is changing as one crosses major fold hinges. Indeed from west to east, this fold system is facing west upward, then east downward, then west upward, and east.The concept of vergence refers to the general sense of shear involved in the development of asymmetric folds. The fold system shown below is verging east as the asymmetry is the result of top toward the east shearing. Unfortunately vergence is also used to refer to the direction of the next anticlinal closure.Changes in fold asymmetry, cleavage-bedding relationships, facing, and shear vergence occurs across fold hinges. Determination of two of these criteria constrain the two others.Photo caption: Younging criteria are sedimentological features informing about the relative position between younger and older layers. Left: Loading cast sedimentary structure showing upward younging. Right: Example of cross-beds showing younging to the left (Photo Credit: P. Rey).45<47>Image 1 (left diagram): A 3D diagram of a parasitic fold. When viewed from the east looking west, it has a "Z" shape. However, if viewed from the west looking east, the same fold would appear to have an "S" shape. This illustrates the importance of a consistent viewing direction when recording fold asymmetry.Image 2 (right animation still): A 3D model of a simple, upright fold. A 2D plane is shown cutting through the fold at an oblique angle. The trace of the fold on this 2D plane appears asymmetric and overturned, demonstrating how a 2D cross-section can give a misleading impression of the true 3D fold geometry.The asymmetry of parasitic folds involves either a clockwise rotation (Z-shaped folds) or an anti-clockwise rotation (S-shaped folds) of the folded surface. The asymmetry of parasitic folds changes across fold hinges as S-shape folds occur in one limb and Z-shaped folds occur on the other. Therefore one can use this change to track down the position of large-scale fold hinges in regions of poor exposures.When doing this some caution should be exercised. In particular it is important to realize that the sense of fold asymmetry (S or Z) depends on the direction toward which the observation is made. The sketch on the right shows a parasitic fold. Looking from east to west the fold appears as a Z-shaped asymmetric fold. In contrast, when looking from west to east the fold appears as an S-shaped fold. This change in asymmetry is not the result of having crossed a fold hinge but simply the consequence of looking at the same parasitic fold in two different directions.To avoid any mistake, fold asymmetry should be determined looking toward the same direction, usually toward the plunge direction of the fold axis in plunging or reclined folds.Another very common source of mistake is entrenched in the fact the 2D sections through 3D objects can be extremely misleading in representing the true fold morphology. Indeed, a simple upright symmetric fold can appear as an apparent overturned to recumbent fold on a 2D vertical section cutting at an angle to the fold axis.Movie 4.1 Mind the gap!46<48>A photograph of a large, complexly folded rock outcrop. Several geology students are climbing on and examining the outcrop. The rocks are metamorphic and show tight, possibly refolded folds. The scene captures the hands-on nature of field geology.1/ What is the fold axis?2/ What is the axial trace?3/ What is the axial planar surface?4/ Draw an overturned, tight, isopach fold.5/ Draw an inclined, open, similar fold.6/ What is a recumbent fold?7/ What is a reclined fold?8/ What do we call a fold with long limbs and narrow hinges?9/ What is a crenulation cleavage?10/ What information do intersection lineations provide?Gallery 4.2 Mind the gap!Comment on the geometry of the folds (Photo Credit: P. Rey).47<49>Image 1 (left): An animation still showing the concepts of a fold axis (the line along the hinge) and the axial surface (the plane connecting the hinges of successive layers).Image 2 (right): A photograph of a coastal cliff with folded sedimentary rocks. The layers are clearly visible and bent into gentle folds. Two people are standing at the base of the cliff for scale.48<50>A screenshot of a multiple-choice question.Question 1 of 6: The attitude of folds and fold systems is or can be fully characterized by:A. Strike, dip and dip direction of the axial planar surface.B. The pole to beddings plotted on a stereonet canvas.C. The plunge and plunge direction of the fold axis.D. A and C together.E. The plunge and plunge direction of the fold axis, and the plunge and plunge direction of an axial trace.Options D and E are both marked with green checkmarks, which might be an error in the quiz design, but E is the more complete answer.(Correct Answers: D and E)49<51>A photomicrograph of a boudinaged rock. A competent (strong), dark-colored layer has been stretched and broken into rectangular segments called "boudins". A less competent (weaker), lighter-colored, foliated matrix has flowed into the gaps between the boudins. The boudins themselves are also internally fractured.We have seen in the previous chapter that folds are an expression of contractional deformation. In this chapter we look at boudins and boudinage which are the result of extensional deformation. Like folding, boudinage exists because rock formations are made of alternating stronger and less strong layers. Contraction and extension can be local and independent of the tectonic setting. Indeed, folding and boudinage can develop at the same time in all tectonic regimes.50<52>Image 1 (top): A laboratory experiment or model showing the formation of boudins. A stiff, dark grey layer embedded in a softer, layered yellow-and-black matrix has been stretched horizontally. The stiff layer has broken into rectangular boudins, and the soft matrix has flowed into the gaps.Image 2 (bottom): Two diagrams illustrating the stress fields that cause boudinage. Arrows indicate the principal stress directions (σ1​,σ2​,σ3​). Extension occurs parallel to σ3​.The left diagram shows pinch-and-swell structures, the precursor to boudinage.The right diagram shows fully formed boudins.Boudins form due to a process called boudinage. Boudins form when lengthening affects a layered rock formation involving competent layers embedded into a less competent, easily deformable, host rock.Upon extension, the stronger layers lengthen via heterogeneous thinning leading to the development of pinch and swell structures (i.e. thinning of the strong layer is periodic). In contrast, the weaker layer can stretch and thin homogeneously.In the stronger layers, amplification of thinning in the pinched regions eventually leads to their segmentation into boudins separated by necks.The strength contrast and the direction of extension with respect to the layer impose a strong control on the geometry of the boudins, which can be either symmetric or asymmetric.51<53>Image 1 (top): A diagram showing the formation of symmetric boudins. A competent layer is being stretched horizontally (parallel to σ3​). It breaks into rectangular boudins.Image 2 (middle): A photograph of a polished rock slab. A dark, competent layer shows the initial stages of boudinage. It is necking down and has developed vertical extensional fractures filled with a white mineral.Image 3 (bottom): A photograph of an outcrop showing a boudinaged granitic vein. The white granitic layer has been broken into several rounded, symmetric boudins, and the darker host rock (schist) has flowed around them. A Nikon lens cap is on the rock for scale.The direction of extension with respect to the orientation of the layering imposes a strong control on the geometry of the boudins.Extension parallel to layering leads to symmetric boudinage. Thinning and necking in the stronger layers often initiates via the development of extensional fractures orthogonal to the layering. As extension proceeds, boudins evolve with a symmetric shape, moving apart in a direction parallel to the original layering.Middle photo caption: Example of extensional fractures orthogonal to bedding in a nascent neck region, the photo is ca. 8 cm long (Photo credit: P. Rey).Bottom photo caption: Example of symmetric boudinage of a granitic vein in a psammitic schist (Broken Hill, NSW, Photo credit: P. Rey).52<54>A gallery of images and diagrams illustrating asymmetric boudinage.Top diagrams: These show two ways asymmetric boudins can form.Extension at an angle to the layering. The competent layer breaks into tilted, asymmetric boudins.Shearing of a layered rock. The competent layer breaks, and the boudins are rotated and acquire a sigmoid (S-shaped) form, indicating the sense of shear.Bottom photographs: Real-world examples of asymmetric boudins in metamorphic rocks, showing the characteristic rotated and sigmoid shapes.Asymmetric boudinage can develop following two processes.1/ When extension occurs at an angle to the layering, necking and thinning in stronger layers can initiate via the development of shear fractures or shear bands depending on the temperature. The boudins evolve with a strong asymmetric shape. As extension proceeds boudins rotate to become parallel to the foliation plane, while developing a sigmoid shape.2/ Asymmetric boudinage can also occur during shearing when the shear zone cuts through a layered rock formation. In this case, the sense of shear can be inferred by the sigmoid shape of the boudins, and/or the curvature of the fabric of the host rock against the shear bands.Gallery 5.1 Asymmetric boudinage53<55>Image 1 (top diagram): A series of diagrams showing the transition from boudinage to folding as the orientation of a competent layer changes relative to the stress field. From left to right:Layer is perpendicular to compression (σ1​): It undergoes layer-parallel extension (σ3​) and forms symmetric boudins.Layer is at an oblique angle: It forms asymmetric boudins that rotate.Layer becomes more parallel to compression: It begins to fold.Layer is parallel to compression: It folds symmetrically.Image 2 (bottom photographs):Top left & right: Outcrop photos showing both folded and boudinaged quartz veins in a metamorphic rock, illustrating that both extension and shortening can occur in the same rock volume.Bottom: A photomicrograph showing a folded and boudinaged ore body.Folding and boudinage are NOT characteristics of contractional and extensional tectonic regimes. Both types of structure can be found in any tectonic regimes. In fact, boudinage can be the consequence of folding, since fold limbs tend to lengthen during deformation.Top right photo caption: Folds and boudins (Montagne Noire, France, Photo credit: P. Rey).Bottom right photo caption: Folds and boudinage in ore body, the picture is ca. 8 cm long (Mt Isa, Queensland, Photo credit: P. Rey)54<56>This page is blank.<57>A Google Earth satellite image showing a massive ductile shear zone in southern Madagascar. The image is oriented with north to the right. A large, light-colored rock body (an anorthosite) is visible, and the surrounding geological fabric (lineaments in the rock) wraps around it in a large-scale sigmoid (S-shaped) pattern. This pattern suggests a top-to-the-north (rightward) sense of shear.The Ampanihy ductile shear zone in south Madagascar (S24°30' - E44°56', north is to the right, length of the picture is ~50 km) is a trans-lithospheric shear zone which has accommodated the amalgamation of Gondwana through collisional processes 650 to 600 Ma ago. The rock body in the middle is a Neoproterozoic anorthosite. The shear fabric wraps around this anorthosite developing a sigmoid pattern, which suggests a top to the north sense of shear. However the stretching lineation is sub-vertical, which suggests a complex polyphased history of deformation.56<58>A wide-angle Google Earth view of the southern part of Madagascar, with North oriented to the right. The image shows the general topography and land cover of the region. A white arrow points to a small, light-colored feature, which is the anorthosite massif shown in detail on the previous page.Ductile shear zones develop as a result of slow, progressive deformation over long periods of time. Deformation is typically continuous and develops without macro-scale fracturing. Rocks stretch but do not break. Deformation is said to be ductile as opposed to brittle. Shear zones are therefore fundamentally different to brittle faults, which involve sudden mechanical instabilities that explain earthquakes.While faulting and fracturing typically develop at relatively low temperatures (<250°C), and/or high-strain rates, and/or high-deviatoric stresses, ductile shearing is the mode of deformation at higher temperatures (>250°C), low strain-rates, and low deviatoric stresses. Ductile shear zones tend to form bands of localised deformation.Ductile shear zones are scale-independent and form from millimeter-scale shear bands, to transcontinental shear zones many tens of kilometers in thickness.Gallery 6.1 Ductile shear zonesSouth part of Madagascar (North is to the right). White arrow points to the anorthosite massif shown on the first page of this chapter.57<59>Two diagrams illustrating the difference in foliation patterns between pure shear and simple shear zones.Top (Pure Shear): A localized zone of pure shear (coaxial deformation or "squeezing") is shown. Outside the zone, the marker lines are straight. Inside the zone, they are deflected to form a symmetric bulge, and the resulting foliation is parallel across the entire zone.Bottom (Simple Shear): A localized zone of simple shear (non-coaxial deformation) is shown. The marker lines outside are straight. Inside the zone, they are deflected into a sigmoid (S-shaped) curve. The resulting foliation is asymmetric and rotates into the shear plane.Across simple shear ductile shear zones, foliation trajectories are asymmetric, as foliation forms at an angle to the main shear plane. As shear strain accumulates, this angle decreases as the foliation becomes progressively parallel to the main shear plane. The angle between the foliation and the main shear plane is a kinematic criteria as it indicates the relative sense of shear.In a pure shear ductile shear zone, the foliation trajectories are parallel to each other across the shear zone, and remain parallel as strain accumulates through times.58<60>A series of diagrams comparing flow lines and strain in pure shear vs. simple shear.Top Left (Pure Shear): A square is deformed into a horizontal rectangle. The colored dots show the particle paths (flow lines), which are hyperbolic. The strain ellipse is shown.Top Right (Pure Shear Flow Lines): A diagram showing the hyperbolic flow lines for pure shear.Bottom Left (Simple Shear): A square is deformed into a parallelogram. The colored dots show the particle paths (flow lines), which are straight and parallel to the shear direction.Bottom Right (Simple Shear Flow Lines): A diagram showing the straight, parallel flow lines for simple shear.NB: The flow field depends on the position of the reference frame.59<61>Two 3D block diagrams defining the reference frames used to describe shear zones.Top Diagram (Kinematic Frame): Defines the 'a', 'b', and 'c' axes. The 'a-b' plane is the Shear plane, and 'a' is the Shear direction. The 'a-c' plane is the Movement plane.Bottom Diagram (Strain and Kinematic Frames): Shows a block of rock transitioning from undeformed Protolith into a Mylonitic zone.The kinematic frame (a, b, c) is fixed.The finite strain frame (X, Y, Z or λ1​,λ2​,λ3​) rotates as the rock enters the shear zone. X is the stretching lineation, and the X-Y plane is the foliation. In the center of the mylonite zone, the strain frame becomes parallel to the kinematic frame.In shear zones, deformation induces a progressive reduction of the size of individual grains and minerals, as they recrystallize into many smaller grains. When most grains (70 to 80%) are no longer identifiable to the naked eye the shear zone is referred to as a mylonite or even ultramylonite for > 90% recrystallisation. In mylonites, clasts float into a fine-grained matrix made of recrystallized grains. Mylonite develops first along the central plane of the shear zone where deformation is the most intense. As shearing proceeds, the thickness of the mylonitic band and that of the shear zone increases. The protolith corresponds to the undeformed rock.Two reference frames are used to describe shear zones:The first relates to the finite strain framework. It consists of three orthogonal axes: X, Y, Z (or λ1​,λ2​,λ3​). Together, X and Y define the flattening plane (i.e. foliation plane). X is parallel to the direction of maximum elongation (i.e. the maximum stretching direction), therefore it is parallel to mineral and stretching lineations formed by the progressive rotation and stretching of minerals and mineral aggregates. Z is the pole of the foliation plane.The second framework is related to the displacement field, it is called the kinematic frame. It consists of three orthogonal axes: a, b, and c. Together a and b define the shear plane in which 'a' corresponds to the shear direction. This plane is parallel to the mylonitic core of the shear zone. The axes 'a' and 'c' define the movement plane. This plane is perpendicular to the shear plane and parallel to the shear direction. The kinematic reference frame remains constant in orientation across the shear zone. In contrast, the finite strain reference frame progressively rotates around the axis Y to become parallel to the kinematic frame in the mylonitic core of the shear zone. The sense of rotation is a kinematic criteria.60<62>Image 1 (top): A wide landscape photograph of a Caledonian eclogite facies ductile shear zone in Norway. The rocks in the foreground and middle ground are exposed, glacially-polished outcrops showing large-scale shear fabrics.Image 2 (bottom): A photomicrograph showing a "delta-type" pressure shadow. A dark, rounded porphyroclast (a remnant of a larger crystal, likely garnet) is shown. During shearing (top-to-the-right), the clast has rotated slightly, and new minerals have crystallized in the low-pressure "shadows" on its sides, forming winged or tail-like structures. The shape of these tails indicates the sense of shear. The caption mentions that delta-type pressure shadows form at a slower rate of dissolution compared to sigma-type.Pressure shadowsKinematic analysis is the art of figuring out the relative sense of shear in shear zones, when they involve a strong component of simple shear.One class of kinematic criteria is based on the asymmetric flow and asymmetric finite strain that result from the presence of minerals and mineral clasts more resistant to deformation than the enclosing matrix. Upon shearing, zones of pressure shadow and zones of pressure concentration develop around these clasts. As fluids and their solutes migrate from regions of high to low pressure, mineral growth occurs in pressure shadows, while dissolution affects zones of pressure concentration. The asymmetry of crystallization tails around clasts depends on the sense of shear, and as such can be used as kinematic criteria. Crystallization tails develop around a clast being progressively dissolved. The rate of dissolution is faster for a sigma pressure shadows than for a delta pressure shadows.Gallery 6.1 Pressure shadows and crystallization tailsTop Image: Caledonian (ca. 400 Ma) eclogite facies ductile shear zone (Holsnoy, Norway, photo credit P. Rey)Bottom Image: Pyrite grains in shale are an extreme case of hard clasts embedded into a soft matrix. As pyrite rotates during shearing, space incrementally opens up at the pyrite's margins. This space is filled with fluids from which minerals such as quartz and calcite precipitate often in a fibrous form.61<63>Image 1 (top): A diagram illustrating the formation of helicitic inclusions. As a porphyroblast (a new mineral growing during deformation, yellow ellipse) grows and rotates within a foliated matrix, it incorporates the matrix foliation. The result is a spiral pattern of inclusions inside the porphyroblast, which records the sense of rotation and thus the sense of shear.Image 2 & 3 (bottom): Two photomicrographs of syn-kinematic garnet porphyroblasts.Left image: A garnet crystal contains spiral-shaped inclusion trails (helicitic inclusions), indicating it rotated clockwise during its growth, which was caused by a shear deformation.Right image: A large, rounded garnet crystal. The foliation of the surrounding rock (matrix) wraps around the garnet. Arrows indicate the sense of rotation of the garnet (top-to-the-SW), which is opposite to the shear sense indicated by the matrix fabric. This suggests a complex, multi-stage deformation history.Helicitic inclusions in porphyroblasts- Some minerals like garnet and staurolite can grow during shearing. These so called porpyroblasts, as opposed to porphyroclasts which are old fragments of mineral, act as a tape recorder for deformation. As they grow, porphyroblasts "freeze" the schistosity that develops in the surrounding matrix. An internal schistosity is recorded, the pattern of which reflects the kinematic of the shearing.Rotation of syn-kinematic mineralsPhoto captions:@Pierre Dèvez: Syntectonic garnet in a metapelite. Helicitic inclusion trails indicate top-to-the-SW rotation. Shear sense criteria in the matrix indicate an opposite shearing associated to a more recent shearing event.@Scott Johnson: Syntectonic garnet porphyroblast in a metapelitic rock. Helicitic inclusion trails indicate clockwise rotation of the garnet during shearing.62<64>Image 1 (left diagram): A diagram illustrating the formation of a "mica fish". A single large mica crystal (which is planar) is shown. As it is sheared, it rotates until it becomes locked. Deformation then concentrates at its edges, forming small shear bands that give it a "fish" or lens shape. The asymmetry of this shape indicates the sense of shear.Image 2 (right photograph): A photograph of a sheared leucogranite. A large muscovite crystal is visible, showing the characteristic "mica fish" shape with small shear bands developing at its tapered ends.Mica fish- Mica, usually muscovite, progressively rotate during deformation. At some stage their cleavages, which correspond to a plane of easy slip, become sub-perpendicular to the direction of maximum stress. When this happens, the cleavage plane of the mica becomes locked. Deformation jumps to the margins of the mica where micro-shear bands initiate. These micro-shear bands progressively lengthen to become shear bands.Gallery 6.2 Mica fishLarge muscovite grain in a leucogranite from the French Massif Central (Photo credit: P. Rey)63<65>A gallery of images and diagrams explaining C-S fabrics.Top photograph: A sheared leucogranite showing a visible foliation. The caption indicates a shear strain (gamma) of ~1.Bottom diagrams: These illustrate the development of C-S and C-S-C' fabrics.C/S fabrics: In a shear zone, an early foliation (S-plane, for Schistosity) develops at an angle to the main shear direction. As strain increases, discrete C-planes (from the French 'Cisaillement' for shear) develop parallel to the shear zone boundary. The S-planes are curved between the C-planes, creating a sigmoid fabric that indicates the sense of shear.C/S/C' fabrics: At very high strains, the S-planes become nearly parallel to the C-planes. A new, secondary set of shear bands, called C'-planes, can form at a low angle to the main C-S fabric.C-S and C-S-C' shear fabrics - A class of kinematic criteria is based on the obliquity between the kinematic and the finite strain reference frames. Across a shear zone, the foliation - or S plane - (S for schistosity) rotates to parallel the shear plane - or C plane - (C for the french word cisaillement). As shearing increases the angle between S and C decreases (see below). This rotation is consistent with the kinematic of the shear zone i.e. a clockwise rotation of the S plane implies a clockwise sense of shear on the C plane.In the mylonitic core, where C and S are sub-parallel, a new generation of shear plane called C' may develop with a small angle (10-15°) to the C plane. This is illustrated in the sketch showing a C/S/C' mylonite.Gallery 6.3 Ductile shear zone in a leucograniteGamma ~1, foliation clearly visible (leucogranite du Gueret, North part of the French Massif Central, Photo credit: P. Rey).64<66>A screenshot of a multiple-choice question.Question 1 of 3: Ductile shear zones develop at:A. Temperature > 250°CB. Low strain ratesC. High differential stressD. Only during simple shearOptions A and B are implicitly correct based on the text. The question format is slightly confusing.1/ What is a shear zone?2/ Define the concept of pure shear strain regime?3/ How can one tell when a shear zone is the result of a simple shear strain regime?4/ Define the following terms: Mylonite, Protolith.5/ What is the difference between the movement plane and the shear plane?6/ Define the strain reference frame and the kinematic reference frame.7/ What are kinematic criteria?8/ Page 66 shows a ductile shear zone, what is its kinematic? (Referring to a previous page's image)9/ What is an SC mylonite?10/ Why does SC mylonite cannot form during a pure shear strain regime?Review 6.1Question 1 of 3Ductile shear zones develop at:A. Temperature > 250°CB. Low strain ratesC. High differential stressD. Only during simple shear65<67>This page is blank.<68>A large, weathered outcrop of metamorphic rock. The rock has a strong planar fabric (foliation) and a linear fabric (line